---
title: Setting up a UK Limited Company
permalink: /setting-up-a-uk-limited-company/
image: resisting-the-urge-to-build-thumbnail.jpg
category: startups
---

*I recently wrote an email to a friend with a little (unprofessional) guidance
on setting up a Limited company. Since it turned out quite large I thought it
might be of use to others, so here it is:*

## Register a limited company

This is the first thing you need to do as you'll need your company number &
documents in order to open a bank account. Opening a bank account can take a
really long time so it's best to get started as soon as possible.

In the past I used a "formation company" - these are companies which submit your
application to Companies House on your behalf. You have to pay a (small) fee
for this, I think it's £18 or something like that.

I used one called
[Complete Formations](http://www.completeformations.co.uk/index.html) which was
a bit clunky but fine. I don't have any experience of any other ones.

Turns out you can do this [directly with companies
house](https://www.gov.uk/register-a-company-online), not sure why I thought
you needed to use a formations company.

### Choose a company name

For a limited company it's got to end in either "Ltd" or "Limited" - for
example mine is called "Green Dragon Software Ltd". It doesn't make any
difference which of the two you choose.

### Allocate share capital

You need to create some shares, define how much each share is worth and then
allocate them to people to give them ownership of the company. If you're going
to 100% own the company then you can just create one single share worth £1 and
allocate it to yourself - that's what most people do! If in the future you want
to give some of the company (equity) to someone else you'll need to adjust this
- but just go for 1 share @ £1 to start.

### Appoint directors

You're probably going to appoint just yourself as managing director - that's
all you need to do.

### Addresses

I remember some confusion about addresses - you need to give a "registered
address" for the company which is where you're legally supposed to keep the
documents for the company (bit out of date, mine are all electronic) This
becomes public domain and can be viewed online for free. You should probably
put your workshop for this.

I think you need to give two addresses for each director as well - I think one
of these becomes public and one is kept private. I think it's called
"correspondence address" (public) and "residential address" (private). You
should probably put your workshop for the correspondence address and your
actual home address for the residential address.

### Articles of association

There are some documents which define the purpose etc of the company. I just
chose the default ones. Once you've registered the company you get some
documents through like the company registration certificate (this has your
registered company number on it, which you'll need) and the articles of
association and stuff. It seems that you really only need it for opening a bank
account.

## Open a bank account

For me this was the most annoying bit with both companies I opened. First time
I went with NatWest and I had to make an appointment with a patronising git who
interviewed me about the business I was going to set up. Because there was a
person involved this took a long time.

The second time was with Santander and this was all online. They claimed they
could open it in a week or something like that but it ended up being delayed -
I can't remember why. You'll need your company registration documents.

The other benefit of Santander is that it works with FreeAgent, the bookkeeping
software I use.

Do this application ASAP because you won't be able to invoice and get paid
until you've got your bank account set up.

## Keeping money separate

Now you've got two legal entities (yourself and your company) you have to be
very disciplined about *who* is spending money and who owns what. Just because
you own 100% of the company doesn't matter - you are still separate.

Unlike an individual, the rules are much stricter for companies for things like
what you are allowed to buy, keeping receipts, etc. The upside, however, is
that a lot of things are tax deductible that wouldn't be for an individual, so
you don't pay any tax on those.

For example: if the company bought a mobile phone for £200 that would now be
logged on the company's balance sheet as an asset. Assuming it has a 3 year
life, the value on the balance sheet would reduce by 1/3 each year. That
reduction contributes towards your end of year profit & loss figure. That's an
important number because you pay corporation tax on the profit.

This is why you need to get an accountant & good book-keeping software! The
accountant can tell you how to file things, what counts as tax deductible etc.
Also I find that FreeAgent's website often has good advice about this.

## Wait for HMRC

After a few days of registering with Companies House, you'll get a letter from
HMRC telling you they know about the company, and giving you a company Unique
Taxpayer Reference (UTR) number.

You need to keep this stupid number because for some reason they require you to
tell them it at various points in the future (why not just use the friggin
company registration number?!)

## Register for PAYE

You can take money out of the company in one of two ways: payroll (AKA salary)
and dividends.

Most people pay themselves a mix of both: people usually pay themselves in
salary up to the first tax band (currently £10,600 this year) then pay the rest
in dividends.

(Legally, dividends can't just be paid out willy nilly - you have to take it
out of the company's current profit - so you can't pay them if you are making a
loss. HOWEVER the book-keeping software I use makes it easy to calculate your
instantaneous profit & loss and see how much you're allowed to take out)

Before you're allowed to pay yourself through payroll, rather absurdly you need
to apply to HMRC for Pay As You Earn (PAYE). Once you've done this you'll then
be able to pay yourself a paycheck, and pay HMRC the tax and national insurance
owed for that paycheck. Again, the book-keeping software I use just does this
all for me.

## Register for VAT (optional)

If your annual revenue is going to be over something like £90K then you are
required to register for VAT. If it's less, you can voluntarily apply for VAT
because it can be beneficial in some circumstances.

If you're mostly selling to consumers (non VAT registered entities) you
probably want to avoid registering for VAT because you'll have to charge 20%
more for the same product. If you're mostly selling to VAT registered
businesses, it won't make any difference to them as they can claim it back, so
knock yourself out.

There's a thing called the flat-rate scheme which can work out well for
companies which have low costs (for example software freelancers).

When you apply for VAT, you have to give a date on which the company will
become VAT registered. You can backdate this to when you opened the company
which makes life simpler, especially if you haven't actually done any trading
since then! Or you could put the date as some date in the future between big
projects or something, so one client gets invoices without VAT and the next
gets them with.

This is something you really need your accountant to advise you on.

## Find an accountant

Because companies have stricter rules than individuals it's really helpful to
have an accountant you can ask for help. You also need to have one to do your
statutory annual report.

There are lots of different packages ranging from quite basic (about £400 per
year) upwards (like £1200 per year). You can choose to do lots of things
yourself, using good book-keeping software, or have the accountant basically
handle everything for you.

I'm really geeky and I like to know what's going on so I've opted to do my own
payroll and VAT reporting, and I pay at the lower end of the scale. My
accountant is 100% remote (I've never met her) but she answers emails quickly
and briefly. In other words, it's basic but I get what I need.

## Get some book-keeping software

I use software called FreeAgent which is basically the most amazing software
ever. It's not cheap - it's about £33 per month - but I'm really in control of
the business and it handles a lot of the crap with HMRC. It basically does some
of what an accountant usually does, like making it really easy to do PAYE and
calculate VAT and stuff.

The other really awesome thing about FreeAgent is that it automatically
downloads my company bank account statements from Santander. That means it's
already done half the job of categorising things - I just need to select eg
"office costs", "travel" or whatever.

For my particular scenario, where I'm a bit of a control freak, FreeAgent is
absolutely perfect and well worth the money.

If you fancy joining I think we both get a discount if you use this link:
[http://fre.ag/44n2b1pk](http://fre.ag/44n2b1pk)

## Pay for things

There are two ways of paying for things: paying directly and paying personally
then reclaiming expenses. Either way you need to keep receipts and enter things
into FreeAgent (or give them to the accountant I guess).

## Get insurance

I think there are some insurance things you need, like maybe employer liability
insurance and public liability insurance. To be honest I only got these because
I did a contract which stated that I needed to have them. If you figure out
why, please let me know!
